=== 1.5.2 (25th July 2014)

* Added `XapianDb#close` to close both the read and write databases.

* Fixed a bug that caused the `:query_builder` to take precedence over
  the given filters.

=== 1.5.1 (17th July 2014)

* You can now customize the parsed query by passing `:query_builder` to
  `XapianDb#search`.

* Add ability to pass a `PostingSource` when searching.

* Add ability to specify how many documents to sample when searching.

  This allows for accurate paging links, facet counts, etc.

* Support a `:weight` option when declaring database fields.

* `XapianDb#search` can now receive a `:ranges` option to disable range
  parsing.

* Facet values are now correctly marked as UTF-8.

=== 1.5.0 (23rd May 2012)

* Support for custom term weights when indexing (Mike Ragalie)

=== 1.4.0 (13th March 2012)

* Support for indexing Arrays properly

* Support returning all and no documents by using Xapian's special
  queries `MatchAll` and `MatchNothing`.

* Add boolean terms and faceted queries.

  See [http://bit.ly/rMuA4M](http://bit.ly/rMuA4M).

* Fix number range queries when no prefixes are given.

=== 1.3.2 (4th December 2011)

* Number range queries (Damian Janowski)

=== 1.3.1 (12th October 2011)

* Fix casting of values on search. (Damian Janowski)

=== 1.3 (7th July 2011)

* Support for phrase searching

=== 1.2 (5th July 2011)

* Support for synonyms (Damian Janowski)
* Fix some Ruby 1.9.2 issues, particularly reading utf8 stop files
* Fixed specs to work with both xapian 1.0 and 1.2

=== 1.1.2 (26th August 2010)

* Spelling correction support

=== 1.1.1 (21st April 2010)

* Support disabling stopping (as per documentation!)

=== 1.1.0 (14th December 2009)

* 64bit support and Ruby 1.9.1 support. On-disk format changed.

=== 1.0.1 (9th September 2009)

* First high quality release. On-disk format changed.

  * Lots more documentation
  * Ordering
  *	Result size limiting
  * Will Paginate support
  * Stemming support
  * Stopping support
  * Field storage improvements
  * Field tokenization and search support
  * Query parsing refactor
  * search options improvements

=== 0.2 (June 2009)

* Initial release

