= Xapian Fu

XapianFu is a Ruby library for working with
{Xapian}[http://xapian.org/] databases.  It builds on the GPL licensed
Xapian Ruby bindings but provides an interface more in-line with "The
Ruby Way"(tm) and is considerably easier to use.

For example, you can work almost entirely with Hash objects - XapianFu
will handle converting the Hash keys into Xapian term prefixes when
indexing and when parsing queries.

It also handles storing and retrieving hash entries as
Xapian::Document values.  XapianFu basically gives you a persistent
Hash with full text indexing (and ACID transactions).

== Installation

  sudo gem install xapian-fu

=== Xapian Bindings

Xapian Fu requires the Xapian Ruby bindings to be available.  On
Debian/Ubuntu, you can install the `ruby-xapian` package to get
them.  Alternatively, you can install the `xapian-ruby` gem, which
reportedly will also provide them.  You can also just get the
upstream Xapian release and manually install it.

== Documentation

XapianFu::XapianDb is the corner-stone of XapianFu.  A XapianDb
instance will handle setting up a XapianFu::XapianDocumentsAccessor
for reading and writing documents from and to a Xapian database.  It
makes use of XapianFu::QueryParser for parsing and setting up a query.

XapianFu::XapianDoc represents a document retrieved from or to be
added to a Xapian database.

== Basic usage example

Create a database, add 3 documents to it and then search and retrieve
them.

  require 'xapian-fu'
  include XapianFu
  db = XapianDb.new(:dir => 'example.db', :create => true,
                    :store => [:title, :year])
  db << { :title => 'Brokeback Mountain', :year => 2005 }
  db << { :title => 'Cold Mountain', :year => 2004 }
  db << { :title => 'Yes Man', :year => 2008 }
  db.flush
  db.search("mountain").each do |match|
    puts match.values[:title]
  end

== Ordering of results

Create an in-memory database, add 3 documents to it and then search and retrieve
them in year order.

  db = XapianDb.new(:store => [:title], :sortable => [:year])
  db << { :title => 'Brokeback Mountain', :year => 2005 }
  db << { :title => 'Cold Mountain', :year => 2004 }
  db << { :title => 'Yes Man', :year => 2008 }
  db.search("mountain", :order => :year)

== will_paginate support

Simple integration with the will_paginate Rails helpers.

  @results = db.search("mountain", :page => 1, :per_page => 5)
  will_paginate @results

== Spelling correction

Spelling suggestions, like Google's "Did you mean..." feature:

  db = XapianDb.new(:dir => 'example.db', :create => true)
  db << "There is a mouse in this house"
  @results = db.search "moose house"
  unless @results.corrected_query.empty?
    puts "Did you mean '#{@results.corrected_query}'"
  end

== Transactions support

Ensure that a group of documents are either entirely added to the
database or not at all - the transaction is aborted if an exception is
raised inside the block.  The documents only become available to
searches at the end of the block, when the transaction is committed.

  db = XapianDb.new(:store => [:title, :year], :sortable => [:year])
  db.transaction do
    db << { :title => 'Brokeback Mountain', :year => 2005 }
    db << { :title => 'Cold Mountain', :year => 2004 }
    db << { :title => 'Yes Man', :year => 2008 }
  end
  db.search("mountain")

== Complete field definition examples

Fields can be described in more detail using a hash. For example,
telling XapianFu that a particular field is a Date, Fixnum or Bignum
will allow very efficient on-disk storage and will ensure the same
type of object is instantiated when returning those stored values.
And in the case of Fixnum and Bignum, allows you to order search
results without worrying about leading zeros.

  db = XapianDb.new(:fields => {
                                 :title => { :store => true },
                                 :released => { :type => Date, :store => true },
                                 :votes => { :type => Fixnum, :store => true }
                               })
  db << { :title => 'Brokeback Mountain', :released => Date.parse('13th January 2006'), :votes => 105302 }
  db << { :title => 'Cold Mountain, :released => Date.parse('2nd January 2004'), :votes => 45895 }
  db << { :title => 'Yes Man', :released => Date.parse('26th December 2008'), :votes => 44936 }
  db.search("mountain", :order => :votes)

== Simple max value queries

Find the document with the highest :year value

  db.documents.max(:year)

== Special queries

XapianFu supports Xapian's `MatchAll` and `MatchNothing` queries:

  db.search(:all)
  db.search(:nothing)

== Search examples

Search on particular fields

  db.search("title:mountain year:2005")

Boolean AND (default)

  db.search("ruby AND rails")
  db.search("ruby rails")

Boolean OR

  db.search("rails OR sinatra")
  db.search("rails sinatra", :default_op => :or)

Exclude certain terms

  db.search("ruby -rails")

Wildcards

  db.search("xap*")

Phrase searches

  db.search("'a steamer in the gene pool'", :phrase => true)

And any combinations of the above:

  db.search("(ruby OR sinatra) -rails xap*")

== Custom term weights

Sometimes you may want to increase the weight of a particular term in
a document. Xapian supports adding
{extra weight}(http://trac.xapian.org/wiki/FAQ/ExtraWeight) to a term
at index time by providing an integer "wdf" (default is 1).

You may set an optional :weights option when initializing a XapianDb.
The :weights option accepts a Proc or Lambda that will be called with
the key, value and list of document fields as each term is indexed.
Your function should return an integer to set the weight to.

  XapianDb.new(:weights => lambda {|k, v, f| k == :title ? 3 : 1}

== Boolean terms

If you want to implement something like [this](http://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/en/latest/howtos/boolean_filters.html#searching),
then:

  db = XapianDb.new(
    fields: {
      name:   {:index => true},
      colors: {:boolean => true}
    }
  )

  db << {name: "Foo", colors: ["red", "black"]}
  db << {name: "Foo", colors: ["red", "green"]}
  db << {name: "Foo", colors: ["blue", "yellow"]}

  db.search("foo", filter: {:colors => ["red"]})

The main thing here is that filtering by color doesn't affect the relevancy of the documents returned.

== Facets

Many times you want to allow users to narrow down the search results by restricting the query
to specific values of a given category. This is called [faceted search](readthedocs.org/docs/getting-started-with-xapian/en/latest/xapian-core-rst/facets.html).

To find out which values you can display to your users, you can do something like this:

  results = db.search("foo", facets: [:colors, :year])

  results.facets
  # {
  #   :colors => [
  #     ["blue",  4]
  #     ["red",   1]
  #   ],
  #
  #   :year => [
  #     [2010, 3],
  #     [2011, 2],
  #     [2012, 1]
  #   ]
  # }

When filtering by one of these values, it's best to define the field as
boolean (see section above) and then use `:filter`:

  db.search("foo", filter: {colors: ["blue"], year: [2010]})

== ActiveRecord Integration

XapianFu always stores the :id field, so you can easily use it with
something like ActiveRecord to index database records:

  db = XapianDb.new(:dir => 'posts.db', :create => true)
  Post.all.each { |p| db << p.attributes }
  docs = db.search("custard")
  docs.each_with_index { |doc,i| docs[i] = Post.find(doc.id) }

Combine it with the max value search to do batch delta updates by primary key:

  db = XapianDb.new(:dir => 'posts.db')
  latest_doc = db.documents.max(:id)
  new_posts = Post.find(:all, :conditions => ['id > ?', lastest_doc.id])
  new_posts.each { |p| db << p.attributes }

Or by :updated_at field if you prefer:

  db = XapianDb.new(:dir => 'posts.db', :fields => { :updated_at => { :type => Time, :store => true } })
  last_updated_doc = db.documents.max(:updated_at)
  new_posts = Post.find(:all, :conditions => ['updated_at >= ?', last_updated_doc.updated_at])
  new_posts.each { |p| db << p.attributes }

Deleted records won't show up in results but can eventually put your
result pagination out of whack. So, you'll need to track deletions
yourself, either with a deleted_at field, some kind of delete log or
perhaps by reindexing once in a while.

  db = XapianDb.new(:dir => 'posts.db')
  deleted_posts = Post.find(:all, :conditions => 'deleted_at is not null')
  deleted_posts.each do |post|
    db.documents.delete(post.id)
    post.destroy
  end

= More Info

Author::  John Leach  (mailto:john@johnleach.co.uk)
Copyright:: Copyright (c) 2009-2012 John Leach
License:: MIT (The Xapian library is GPL)
Mailing list:: http://rubyforge.org/mailman/listinfo/xapian-fu-discuss
Web page:: http://johnleach.co.uk/documents/xapian-fu
Github:: http://github.com/johnl/xapian-fu/tree/master
